---
layout: postsLayout
title01: MENACE
categories: Mathematics
aboutMe: A mechanical computer which learns to defeat you in tic-tac-toe
inspiration: Inspired by Matthew Scrogg's blog.
author: Savakar Rohan
shortDescription: Menace is a mechanical computer which can learn to play the classic game of tic-tac-toe and learn to make decisions in a better manner
tags: Mechanical Computer Learning tic-tac-toe noughts&crosses Donald Mitchie noughts&crosses
_links: https://www.mscroggs.co.uk/blog/ https://www.gwern.net/docs/reinforcement-learning/1963-michie.pdf
img01: img/01_Menace/01_tic-tac-toe.png
img02:
img03:
---

The Matchbox Educable Noughts and Crosses Engine (**MENACE**)is a mechanical computer made from 304 matchboxes designed and built by Donald Mitchie in 1961.

## What?

During world war II when computers were essentially mechanical devices and women crunching numbers, there was an interest to make a computer to learn by itself. Eager to demonstrate artificial intelligence through "trial and error learning" in simple mental games he constructed a device out of matchboxes to test out his algorithms.

## The view

Copying one of his paper's paragraph first passage [^1] :

> A reason for being interested in games is that they provide a microcosm of intellectual activity in general. Those thought processes which we regard as being specifically human accomplishments—learning from experience, inductive reasoning, argument by analogy, the formation and testing of new hypotheses, and so on are brought into play even by simple games of mental skill. The problem of artificial intelligence consists in the reduction of these processes to the elementary operations of arithmetic and logic.

[^1]: https://www.gwern.net/docs/reinforcement-learning/1963-michie.pdf

One can imagine the game as a "sequential decision" process, the sequence of choices made during the various "states" of the game result in an outcome. The outcome then being assigned a value, (much like John Nash's theory of utility) which determines how fruitful the previous desicions are. As the device learns _from past experiences_ it receives _reinforcements_ on what is good and bad.

### Analogy to teaching a baby or a puppy

I love to take the analogy of teaching a baby or puppy during their prime initial years. In the following paragraphs I will consider the dog as a subject. A typical method of teaching involves repeating the words "sit"
